# Introduction

My name is Derya Akbaba and I am a PhD student at the Media and Information Technology division at Linköping University. Broadly, I collaborate with scientists and other domain experts to create data visualizations to understand how visualizations function in the world. Specifically, I use feminist theory as a lens to unpack and articulate the impact of power and privilege embedded in visualization design, data, and visualization research. The field of visualization began as computer graphics, engineering visual digital representations of spatial, complex data like flows or biological scans. Early work in the field focused on processing and visualizing the data in efficient methods. This research benefitted domain experts using visualizations within their work to make analytical decisions. While this work is ongoing, there are current research threads that have shifted toward understanding the role of visualization as an interacting and entangled component within social and technical systems. This intersection of people, tasks, and visualization will be the focus of the assignment.

# 

# Connecting to Lectures

Select at least 2 principles/ideas/concepts/techniques and discuss how they relate to your research and topic area.  
**Robert's Lectures:**

1. **Software engineering \= computer science \+ reality.** At the very beginning of the course, we covered the idea of a more holistic approach to software development. This was iterated both in the slide material and also in the paper *Hidden Technical Debt in Machine Learning Systems* by Sculley et. al. This idea resonates with my research because I am also trying to bring awareness to the many factors that affect how visualizations are read and thus, work in the world. While visualization research has primarily focused on developing cool new visualization techniques (or technical achievements), it has only now begun to pay attention to the social systems (and more\!) that affect how useful a vis tool can be.  
1. **Behavioral engineering, understanding group dynamics.** It was very interesting to see the research done on how group dynamics impact software engineering. These types of ideas, like understanding psychological safety or norms, broaden the type of research that can be done in visualization as it is not currently being done.

**Guest Lectures:**

1. **Per Lenberg, Behavioral software engineering.** During his lecture, Per discussed the benefit of pairing behavioral science with software engineering in relation to his work. While I have seen my field take on ideas from behavioral economics and communications theory, I have not yet seen anyone specifically look to behavioral science to understand visualizations. I see this as a potential future research opportunity.  
1. **Parthasarathy Dhasarathy, Using AI for making it easier to communicate while software engineering.**  In this example, LLMs were used to help match variables and functions across large code bases. I am sure this can be applied within visualization both in the code-writing process and also possibly in visual searchers or chart comparisons.

# 

# Connecting to Papers

**Dzhusupova, Rimma, Jan Bosch, and Helena Holmström Olsson. "The goldilocks framework: towards selecting the optimal approach to conducting AI projects." Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on AI Engineering: Software Engineering for AI. 2022\.**

In this paper, the authors are investigating why a small percentage of companies are able to deploy and scale AI/ML systems, despite the apparent popularity. The work investigates how one international company uses different types of AI products: in-house, working with the platform provider, or off the shelf. The contribution is a case study using SWOT analysis and then a framework to guide other companies to figure out the best approach to picking their flavor of AI software.

In my own research, I am interested in expanding the entanglements that affect how visualizations are used in the world. In one of my projects, I interviewed visualization researchers and their past collaborators in order to assess the collaboration and longevity of the visualization tool that had been developed. It turned out that there were a whole host of reasons why the tool was not used after. Often, the teams that we interviewed did not have access to larger software engineering teams and so the maintenance would rely on the graduate student, or the project would just die because the domain experts lacked the resources to upkeep the tool.

The work presents workflow phases and then key questions that can be asked during those phases. I can immediately recognize that these questions would be incredibly useful throughout the process of developing a visualization within a new organization. Like deploying an ML system, vis systems also have context and that context needs to be considered if the tool is to have uptake and longevity. Another consideration brought forward by the paper is a cost benefit analysis of company goals. This is rarely done in my field and could certainly contribute to our understanding of how visualizations are used in bigger spaces.

In this work, the term AI software could be swapped out with any other type of software that is being implemented in an organization. The work presents the considerations at each workflow stage and offers important axes of evaluation for what type of product to pick in order to ensure longevity of use. My main critique is that this is done in a company setting and it makes it difficult to translate to most of visualization research which is done in bespoke, one-off collaborations with scientists and other domain experts. Additionally, visualizations are used quite broadly (ie. journalism) and so evaluating the visualization goes beyond an internal review of the team/organization that is using it. However, the work presented in this paper, is an excellent frame for any vis system used within a company.  
**Meesters, Marcel, Petra Heck, and Alexander Serebrenik. "What is an AI engineer? An empirical analysis of job ads in The Netherlands." Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on AI Engineering: Software Engineering for AI. 2022\.**

In this work, the authors seek to understand the expectations that companies have of AI engineers through analyzing job ads. The authors note that there is no one definition of what an AI engineer is in the literature. They surveyed 367 job ads and coded them according to the skills and tasks that were listed in the ad. They found that most jobs require a broader set of software development skills, mastering a broad range of skills.

This paper proposes an interesting challenge in hiring and training AI engineers that parallels visualization engineers. Both require a broad range of technical skills while also the ability to work with and understand data and technical systems from other sources. Unfortunately, within our research field, there is very little focus in what practitioners are doing. Therefore, our collective knowledge of *how* visualization practitioners are hired and for what skills is very little. Given that my research is concerned with the entanglements of visualization, I would be very interested to conduct a similar study that tries to code the skillset sought after in a visualization engineer.

If my research were to be combined with the research from this paper, it would most likely be applied in a corporate setting where the team was trying to hire a set of engineers trained in AI, vis, and the combination of the both. Particularly, it would be interesting to see how difficult it would be signal the appropriate set of broad skills that would allow the organization to hire an engineer with the intersection of both skills. The paper would help improve the project by establishing the correct key words to signal this type of job. However, there is no equivalent research within visualization, so it would be difficult to know how to signal this skillset in a job application.

Unfortunately, the last part of the assignment question does not apply to this paper. The work generally speaks to the broad scope of skills required by ML engineers which is something that is shared in common with visualization engineers. The paper *does* however, discuss the types of technology that are desired for ML engineers. Of this techstack there is very little overlap. Namely, software technologies have the most overlap — Git, containers, and JS frameworks. It would be interesting to see whether expanding the tech stack of visualization engineers to include ML technologies would result in smoother handoffs between the two skillsets.
